now Israel's military campaign in Gaza
in response to the terror attacks
committed by Hamas on October 7th has
been described as one of the deadliest
and most destructive in recent memory
and a new intelligence estimate finds
that many bombs Israel is dropping on
the territory are unguided that could
undercut Israel's claim that it's doing
all it can to minimize civilian
casualties tww security and defense
reporter William glucoft has a look at
the data Israeli officials have
repeatedly said they take care to avoid
civilian deaths even in the best case
scenario however that's a challenge to
stick to because Gaza is one of the most
densely populated places in the world
before this latest fighting broke out
more than 2.2 million people lived in a
space of just 365 square kilometers
that's smaller than many midsize cities
some military analysts have been
skeptical of Israel's targeting efforts
new information casts even more doubt
about them a recent us intelligence
report estimates that Israel has now
dropped more than
29,000 air to ground weapons on Gaza and
as much as 45% of them have been what's
known as dumb bombs these are weapons
without GPS or another sort of guidance
system making it difficult to direct
them against a specific Target Israel's
tactics have led US President Joe Biden
a staunch supporter of Israel to call
the bombing campaign quote
indiscriminate the United Nations
estimates 90% of gaza's population has
been displaced and 45% of all homes too
damaged to be lived in again satellite
imagery suggests well over 100,000
buildings have by now been damaged or
destroyed and we can show you some of
the satellite images from the US company
maxar Technologies these show
neighborhoods before and after Israeli
air strikes
you can see from these images just how
much whole neighborhoods have been
damaged
before after now the physical
destruction gives us an idea of the
human toll gaza's Hamas run Health
Ministry says more than 20,000 people
have been killed so far many of them
civilians and about
8,000 of them children many more of
course have been injured or face
secondary risks like hunger or disease
conflict research ERS say there is
little recent precedent for this level
of Destruction and impact on
non-combatants now despite this level of
Destruction Israel says it will keep it
up until Hamas has been wiped
out for more let's bring in military
analyst Frank ledwich he's a former
British Military Intelligence officer
and joins us now from Oxford Frank good
to see you again we just hearded their
29,000 Munitions around half of them
so-called dumb bombs how does that fit
into the Israeli military's claim that
it is only targeting Hamas not gazans in
general well good afternoon Nicole I
think it's worth mentioning that Western
Air Forces the US Air Force
predominantly also the British German
French and others pretty much have given
up the use of what are called dumb bombs
we use only now Precision guided weapons
however it's also worth pointing out of
course that we haven't conducted
operations of the intensity the is Isis
have even mosul doesn't really
compare and there are two constraints on
Israeli operations in this respect the
first is the availability of weapons so
we've had 29,000 strikes probably more
bombs than that uh figures would tend to
show the Israelis may be running out of
precision kits to fit on the bombs and
it may well be a question of
availability of ordinance now that may
or may not be the case we don't know I
guess we will we will never know but
there's also another issue and that's
the delivery system so it's not just the
case that any aircraft can use Precision
guided weapons I was talking to a royal
Air Force officer yesterday who told me
actually not every aircraft is fitted
with them nor every pilot equipped
trained and cleared to deliver these
weapons so there are those constraints
however the effect may be uh the
intention may be discriminate the effect
does seem to be indiscriminate the
effect not the intent I have no doubt at
all that the Israelis do not intend to
injure or kill uh more garans than
necessary unfortunately it does seem
that their Rules of Engagement have been
uh somewhat uh eased over the last
couple of months are there specific
situations where the use of unguided
Munitions is
legitimate yes you can deliver uh
unguided Munitions reasonably accurately
usually within a sort of uh era of about
30 mters Precision guided weapons is 3
MERS or even less in some cases
depending on the missile you use so if
you're attacking a military Target and
you can be fairly certain that
collateral damage will be prop as it's
horrendously called in other words
civilian casualties is proportionate to
the effect you gain you can use unguided
weapons but as I say uh Western Air
Forces tend not to do so we often hear
that Northern Gaza has been flattened we
just saw the pictures there that William
was showing some observers are comparing
it to what in the past has been called
carpet bombing would you agree
no if the Israelis wanted to flatten
Gaza they could do so in a few days
quite easily as could any uh modern Air
Force we saw what the Russians did to
Aleppo we're not seeing that really in
Gaza uh it's not a good look though
there's no question about it I just
don't like to use terms like carpet
bombing because it does bring up Dresden
and Hamburg and all the other horrors of
the second world war and I think we can
probably avoid
that now let's let's talk about the the
um the the strateg y here do you think
what Israel or what the IDF is doing
right now in Gaza will lead them to
their stated goal of eliminating
Hamas well that's an operational goal
and I think in due course they will uh
eviscerate the military capability of
Hamas but in a sense that's not a
strategy and anybody talking about a
strategy here I think would have to
concede that we are absent of strategy
we don't know what Gaza is going to look
like afterwards we don't know what
political track is being looked at or
aimed at and that as we' found out time
and time and time again over the last 20
years is the important thing there's no
strategy here there are just operational
techniques uh an objective and then
let's see apparently let's see what
happens and and we'll look after it when
the time arrives that's no way to
conduct any military conflict so
strategy here isn't the appropriate word
operationally yes they are eviscerating
Hamas but of course is the cost
proportionate and is that cost uh
politically sustainable over the long
term and particularly in in in Israel's
friends that's perhaps out with this
conversation but it's something that uh
I think a consideration is with us every
day could there be any legal
implications of using dumb bombs against
such a densely populated area like the
Gaza
Strip well as I say I think there's no
evidence that the Israelis are
deliberately targeting civilians which
would be in violation of the discre
mintion uh principle of international
humanitarian law and by the way I think
it's worth mentioning all the time that
there is a bright white line to be drawn
between the deliberate murder of
non-combatant civilians such as we saw
on October the 7th and what's happening
now uh clearly however the figure of
20,000 which is probably well exceeded
now is unacceptable uh it it WR large or
indeed WR small and it's having
horrendous effects on Israel's overall
political situation but uh but in terms
of uh uh legal response look the
Practical element of this is um there'll
be no legal recourse I think against
Israeli uh Israeli operators in this
respect the the the procedures aren't
present but that's for now let's see
what happens in the future as military
analyst Frank lewi thank you always
great speaking to you thank you
Nicole